---
layout: post
title: A Brief History of Mass Shootings
author: Maria Esther Hammack
permalink: /a-brief-history-of-mass-shootings
---

 On August 4, 1966 Lieutenant George Phifer from the Austin Police Department updated file M-968150 indicating that both NRA and the Austin Rifle Club reported that Charles Whitman had no active membership in their respective firearm clubs.[^1] The official declarations that Whitman had no active membership to any firearm organization, or shooting club, in spite of him having been in possession of a large arsenal of handguns, rifles, and shotguns has created more questions than answers for those who seek to comprehend what happened on August 1, 1966 at the University of Texas at Austin.[^2] Violent crime, our society's complicated relationship with guns, and our tendency to not heed the lessons of the past, among other factors, have wrought a complicated history of mass shooting in the United States.

In this country violent crime perpetrated with guns is nothing new, in spite of what the media purports. Today, every Columbine, Charleston's Emanuel Church, Sandy Hook, and Virginia Tech our society faces seems ever worse than those of yesterday. This illusion is either because of how the prominent number of mass shootings that have happened in the past two decades, have managed to desensitize us or because of how we emotionally suppress the memory of violent crimes renders us a collective amnesia.  Violent crime perpetrated with firearms, particularly mass shootings, has been a prevalent problem since at least when the second amendment’s ratification in 1791 guaranteed certain unalienable rights to every gun-toting American. This has fashioned a history that has experienced many highs and lows and seemingly more highs in the twentieth century. Examining this history has been a difficult, but compelling task, particularly because one of the regarded major mass shootings in the history of the United States occurred in our community, Austin, and even fifty years later, we are still compelled to dig deep within our history to find the answers that might give us closure. 

The history of mass shootings, as we understand mass shootings today, has prompted a purposeful questioning towards the problems deep engrained in our society. Many, and perhaps most of these problems, predate what we regard as the first mass shooting, the 1966  UT Tower shootings. This makes this history ever so hard to present because much of what we know and understand about mass shootings has been shaped by what we know, don't know, and even what we imagine the Charles Whitman mass shootings were. 

Six years before the UT shootings, in 1960, the Chief of the Los Angeles Police Department, William H. Parker, lamented that high numbers of violent crime rates had bequeathed the United States "the dubious distinction of being the most lawless of the world's nations," and he explained that,  statistically, the experts were foretelling a continued increase in violent crime rates.[^3] As if Parker's comments were prophecy, a number of violent shootings ensued shortly thereafter that seemed to have materialized out of thin. President John F. Kennedy's assassination on November 22, 1963 seemed to awaken the nation to shootings, and violent crime.[^4] Much debate on appropriate gun control legislation occurred but to no avail given that no major changes came to pass in its aftermath, at least nothing that could have prevented Charles Whitman from going on his murderous shooting spree on that August morning in 1966. Interestingly enough, up until 1966, there existed only two federal laws that purposely controlled gun flow in US society:  the National Firearms Act of 1934, and the Federal Firearms Act of 1938.[^5]

The prophecy that called on the imminent increase of violent crime rates and mass shootings can be analyzed through a short but precise study of the  deaths caused by firearms in the United States. Official reports, for instance, show that in the year of 1966 alone there were 9,413 deaths by firearm shootings, not including suicides.[^6] The figures, however, had not been on a steady climb as we might have a tendency to believe, but instead have historically fluctuated, not just increasing, but also often declined from time to time.  In fact the year 1943 saw the lowest firearm related deaths in the twentieth century with 5,762 deaths from shootings, with deaths by firearms increasing in the 1960s decade but later again decreasing to a low in the next decade.[^7]

The mass shootings and violent crime rates that we witness today, particularly those that happen on schools property, or those related to military, or ex-military personnel are seldom a reflection of today's generation or its relationship with guns but are a reflection of something deeper and intrinsically more complex ,both to understand and explain.  Even before the turn of the twentieth century disturbing shootings have occurred. Take for instance, that which happened on March 28, 1891 when  a man with a doubled barreled shotgun fired upon a crowd of students and faculty attending a school exhibition in Parson Hall School House in Liberty, Mississippi wounding over fourteen people mostly children.[^8]

The history of mass shootings, from then on, has become more complicated in this country. Since The Parson Hall School House Shootings, the United States has witnessed its fair share from war veteran Gilbert Twigg, who, onAugust 14, 1903, fired into a crowd of people in Winfield, Kansas, killing nine and wounding twenty-five, to Thomas Jones’ episode, went on a murderous shooting spree on January 1913 in Houston, Texas to Melvin Collins who, on November 6, 1948, went inside the boarding house he with deliberate abandon from there to people walking outside, killing eight people and injured countless more.[^9] In a similar fashion another military man, Howard Unruhshot thirteen people and wounded at least five others in Camden, New Jersey on September 1949.  To that list add William Bauer whose violent shooting spree left seven dead including himself, in 1956.[^10]

The notion portrayed by media outlets and the memory that materializes about the UT Tower Shooting on how Charles Whitman was the “first” violent school shooting, the “first” military-connected shooting, or even the “first” violent killing spree in the United States is a mythicized misconception. Historically the United States experienced its many mass shootings before 1966.  The perception that Charles Whitman's tower shooting was the first in the country may be erroneous but perhaps the perception of how and why it was the first to show what deathly a combination violent crime, our society's relationship to guns and our tendency to so readily forget our past history may not be that from the truth. 

What has become apparent through this examination of the history of mass shootings is that the realities of what transpired on August 1st, 1966 at the University of Texas at Austin were unprecedented in both number of lives ended, number of individual lives affected, the extent of emotional damage perpetrated within both, UT's and Austin's communities, and the way in which public memory of the tragedy has since been overshadowed by factors that have been and still are hard to comprehend. The attitudes towards the incident, both at UT and in the Austin community have seemingly created an abysmal amnesia towards that tragic episode. Charles Whitman’s ninety-six minute shooting spree left 17 dead, including Whitman, thirty wounded, and many more maimed. That alone, for any community, in any era, and under whatever circumstance is a hard experience to process.



[^1]: Report made by Lt. George Phifer 197/mm-503, Offense number M-968150, Supplementary Offense Report, August 5th, 1966, Police Department Records of the Charles Whitman Mass Murder Case, AR.2000.002, DO/1958.003, Box 1, Folder 5, Austin History Center.

[^2]: Gary Laverne, _The Sniper in the Tower: The Charles Whitman Murders_ (Denton, Texas: The University of North Texas Press, 1997), 120.

[^3]: Richard Harris, "Annals of Legislation: If you Love Your Guns," _The New Yorker_, April 20, 1968,  in  Eckhard (Bob) Papers, box 3M28, Dolph Briscoe Center for American History. The University of Texas at Austin.

[^4]: President Johnson issued a statement after the UT Tower Shooting on August 2, 1966 reminding congress after President's J.F. Kennedy's assassination there had been great public clamor for stricter gun controls particularly over the sale of firearms, which he argued had been stalled long enough in Congress, _The New York Times_, August 7, 1966.

[^5]: Firearms Facts: Compiled by Criminal Division: United States Department of Justice, July 16, 1968, in Gun Legislation Folder, HR 17735 in  Eckhard (Bob) Papers, box 3M28, Dolph Briscoe Center for American History. The University of Texas at Austin.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Firearms Facts: Compiled by Criminal Division: United States Department of Justice, July 16, 1968, in Gun Legislation Folder, HR 17735 in  Eckhard (Bob) Papers, box 3M28, Dolph Briscoe Center for American History. The University of Texas at Austin.

[^8]: “Attempted Murder,” _Aspen Evening Chronicle_, March 30, 1891.

[^9]: “Houston The Scene of Terrible Tragedy,” _Bryan Daily Eagle and Pilot_, January 8, 1913; “The Camon Band Massacre,” _The Winfield Courier_, August 14, 1903.

[^10]: Box 2.325/D27a, _Austin American-Statesman_ Pulitzer Prize Nomination Scrapbook, 1966-1977, Dolph Briscoe Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin.